[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with olympic
silver medalist datsy bausch dassey
thank you so much for joining me today
thank you i'm stoked to be here very
very excited to have you um when i i've
met a few olympians in my life and i'm
always blown away by the extraordinary
amount of effort that it takes to get
there and i know at least as of when you
competed you were the oldest person in
your event to ever compete in the
olympics which is pretty extraordinary
39 if i'm not mistaken
which is i mean that's really really
unbelievable
how old were you when you
most olympians start when they're young
kids but how old were you when you first
picked up a bike and and started to to
get into it
um yes i was old i hobbled up on that
podium but i made it both because i was
old and because my legs hurt really bad
it just accomplished out on the track
but i was 26 when i when i first picked
up a bike i mean really i mean i had
like a banana seat bike that i wrote
around my neighborhood when i was like
10 but uh really you know picking up an
actual bike and riding any distance
further than five miles i was 26. wow
what when you think about so first of
all and we'll we'll get into your early
story but so you
you start in a pretty gnarly place and
the bike sort of somewhat of your
therapy
how do you
begin to take something so seriously was
that a long slow process or was that
something that just a part of your
personality if you're gonna do something
you're gonna do it all the way
so picking up the bike in the first
place was really a suggestion for my
therapist i was healing from
um
i was healing from anorexia i was
very ill and and throughout that
couple year journey of healing with her
towards the very end she
really wanted me to be able to move my
body in a healthy way again and i was
living out in los angeles at the time
still am and
you know it's sunny 365 days and so she
said you know it's just select something
outside but i
want you to pick a sport or an activity
or some kind of movement that you know
it's like all right this is something
that i i feel like i would enjoy doing
and it would be also something that
would kind of lean out of um you know
prior bad behavior which uh as an
anorexic uh and oftentimes
anorexics have over exercise disorder
which i had which was
multiple hours in the gym on the
stairmaster and the elliptical in the
treadmill so it was like those are not
on the table for something you can pick
so i just really quite uh hazardous
bicycle i said what if i get a bike and
she said i love that idea so i got one
it's interesting so one thing um i
i used to be about 60 pounds heavier and
i went through a process of getting lean
i will say it's probably the most
difficult thing that i've ever done
i did it through essentially rabbit
starvation so i was only eating
more or less boiled chicken and steamed
broccoli it was
ruthless uh but i remember thinking like
okay i have an insane amount of
discipline i can get through this there
was a lot of pride in controlling like
what i ate there was a lot of pride in
watching myself get leaner and there was
there was like an enthusiasm to how much
can i suffer how hardcore can i be and i
remember thinking oh like this is how
people end up being anorexic like you
you sort of fall in love with how
disciplined and hardcore you can be so i
remember giving my wife like a chip she
could cash at any time and i said look i
know that i am racing towards body
dysmorphia and no matter how lean i get
i feel like i have more to get lean now
i'm still trying to maintain muscle mass
so i wasn't emaciated or anything like
that but i could tell i was playing a
dangerous game and i remember saying to
my wife if i ever get to the point where
you think okay this is now problematic
you say to me this is problematic and i
will instantly stop and turn around
but i'd be curious to know what you
think about that level of discipline
that anorexics have to have and do you
think that applied to your ability to
get so [__] good and to suffer so
much to become as as
impressive as you were on the bike
oh i'm absolutely positive that the
suffering aspect played a role because i
i remember always thinking when i was uh
cycling and any kind of um
you know aerobic endurance sport is
involves an excruciating amount of
suffering uh so many people don't really
recognize like the the the deep dark
places you have to go to push past
barriers to to get better to improve
and so when i was in just the depths of
suffering whether i was in a race or
whether i was in training or whether i
was in the lab being tested on whatever
it might be um i always remember
thinking
uh
a it'll never ever be as bad as it was
ever it'll never hurt that bad is when i
was suffering with anorexia and two and
almost more importantly
this is going to end and it's gonna end
in the next
30 seconds to three hours whereas with
my illness
i thought there was never going to be a
so i didn't have that hope when i was
struggling from anorexia but with
cycling it was like this has an end and
then all the beauty shows up of either i
won the race or you know whatever i help
the team mater you know it's going to be
something good at the end or if it's
just a big huge pasta dinner something
is going to be good at the end of that
finish line so
it it it probably was one of the key
reasons uh or you know of vehicles that
fueled me for being able to suffer like
that on the bike
that that's super interesting to me and
i want to get into the sort of deep dark
place that one has to go to do something
extraordinary which i will say is almost
certainly a universal aspect whether
it's um
you know getting great like you did at a
physical pursuit or whether it's
something like business or whatever the
case like you're really gonna have to
dig deep but um
the fascinating thing about anorexia is
you can't give up food right so with
drugs you can just sort of give up drugs
and you're done and that's that
but you can't do the same when it comes
to food did you intentionally change
your relationship to that discipline and
that drive and point it at something or
was it as you began racing you began to
realize that there was a sort of similar
energy and you thought okay i'm going to
co-op that like how did that
relationship
and i guess what i'm really driving at
is to me
it's what i call the sickness to achieve
something great you need a sickness you
need something that that pushes you so
hard that people begin to worry that
you're obsessed
and that can go in a negative direction
or it can go in a positive direction it
seems like you've experienced both and
i'm just really curious about how you
manage that relationship
yeah i had so many people in the midst
of my career towards the end as it was
you know leaning into olympics
it's an uh you know if that was just
replacing right this other disorder this
other disease
the obsession with training which you
are obsessed
if you are an olympian for sure you're
not you know it is your whole day every
day day in and day out year after year
um and i think the answer is probably so
but that was okay but that that the part
of my personality that was so addictive
in nature and so self-loathing that that
drew me into the anorexia was that exact
same part of me
is the olympian
so it was just it to me it was just like
the other side of the coin that showed
up and it
was
something that
turned into something beautiful
and
now it's looking back on it it's you
can't believe that was
that was the same
side right you flip it and there there
is the there's the other
i think so many people can
learn
from
their pain right and they're suffering
it it's
so many people don't right they lose
their life to whatever the addiction is
but
once you kind of can just just kind of
crawl to the other side and just sort of
peek in oh there's so much goodness on
the other side and it's the same you but
it is just doing something completely
and entirely different with it with it
but you still get to be a you know
addicted crackhead and i say i don't say
that lightly i wasn't also an addicted
crackhead so along with the anorexia and
so but it's like
a joyful smiling like healthy good for
the world and good for yourself addicted
crackhead on the other side for sure
yeah that that to me and i know you say
that somewhat tongue-in-cheek but i
think there's like a key to the universe
in that which so there's this um
stanford biologist named robert sapolsky
and he talks a lot about understanding
how disorder falls on a spectrum and
that's something when taken to its
extreme
um
you can actually recognize that you may
have some of those elements just they're
sort of on a lighter end of the spectrum
but once you realize that that it is
sort of this fluid spectrum then it
becomes a question of what am i aiming
this thing at so somebody who spills
over into pathology if you back up a
couple steps it may have actually been
incredibly useful which is why it
continues on right so when i was and i
am making no claims i was not anorexic i
did not suffer in a way people that
suffer from that is so brutal and i'm
not trying to in any way shape or form
insinuate that i was in that but when i
was dieting i tapped into something that
i thought whoa this is the first time
where i grabbed a hold of something
powerful and i thought
this could help me or this could hurt me
and understanding that
now i get to choose what i pointed at i
get to choose whether you know i'm
pursuing becoming an olympian or i'm
trying to disappear and it i think it
would benefit everybody to hear you talk
about sort of why you were headed down
that path but
and i also want to tease apart two
things you said so there was the
self-loathing and there's that like
hyper discipline of the anorexic and you
said that both of those are the same as
the olympian and so framing this for
somebody who's going through this now
and they can only see the bad they can
only see the negative and they don't see
how quickly that coin can be flipped to
now hey aim this at something incredibly
powerful because you're touching on two
things some some of the most
extraordinarily divisive things i've
ever said are you need to be obsessed
and this is a competition that gets me
in trouble every time i say it and that
self-hatred can
be useful but it can also be wildly
destructive and so i'd love to hear you
sort of um tease those two things apart
or say no like for me they've just been
inextricably together and then
how that was a part of your journey
well first of all i don't know how
quickly the coin can be flipped for me
it was not a quick flipping at all what
was that timeline
oh it was
i was sick for about five years and it
was it was two years uh before i would
say i was you know considered myself
well
you know i don't know
two years of after you started therapy
yeah yeah well i mean i went into
different treatment centers did all
sorts of therapy with different
therapists that i hated and lied to the
whole time and so you know
putting that
behind and really the therapist that
saved my life that i connected with
almost on day one and stayed with for
two years yes our journey was two years
my healing journey was you know from the
beginning of treatment was you know like
three and a half or something but the
first year and a half i wasn't i was
like i'm not signing up for this so you
know it's just other people were in my
life saying you know you need to get
help so you know you kind of go through
the motions to keep them at bay uh keep
them satisfied but those it was it was a
good it was a good two years of
pretty in-depth really in-depth work you
know in the beginning the three four
days a week you know towards the end
once a week but it wasn't uh so it was a
lot of unraveling of
of stuff and and being able to locate
and understand my inner pain and where
it was coming from and you know we did
it she was a meditation therapist so we
did a lot of uh you know physical
meditation of when i was really
on the brink of
um
by that point it had turned into bulimia
so when i was really on the brink of a
binge or a purge you know stopping
and
placing
my awareness on the pain inside my body
giving it a shape giving it a texture
giving it a size even and being with it
because
with my disease i was completely
disconnected from my physical self you
know his mind and body and they were
living two separate lives so we had a
lot of work to do
to connect to which is really
interesting
moving into life as an athlete because
you know your body becomes your vehicle
for success and if the two aren't
inextricably inextricably linked
it's at least to some degree
you're not going to be able to push
through the suffering with your mind
right but be able to explore
what the limits are and with the
possibilities of where your physical
self can can you know can get to
talk to me a little bit more about um
getting into your body that's definitely
me um putting words in your mouth but
the the thought of sort of relinking the
mind and the body why was that useful i
can see how you would need to pull them
apart if you're going to ask your body
to suffer as much as you did but why
does healing begin with bringing them
back like how does that
function
okay so everybody out there that is you
know has a disorder is addicted to a
substance let's say substance abuse or
alcohol abuse or you know sex addiction
or porn or whatever your candy is right
and
you know a lot of people have a hard
time putting eating disorders in that
category but it is an addictive behavior
and that's just the poison i i chose was
starving myself and then you know and
then eventually binging and purging that
was just the poison i also had you know
like i said sidekick uh with the cocaine
addiction but the real issue i mean my
real poison was this that's how i acted
out on my inner pain so
all of us who have uh an addiction
whether there's a general addictive
nature of you or not uh 99 of us are
acting out on inner pain in some way
shape or form whether it is in the
subconscious or it is in this conscious
mind you are acting out an inner pain
so when you're in the throes of okay i'm
gonna have my next drink or i'm gonna
have my next hit or i'm gonna have my
next binge and throw up you are
completely disconnected mind and body
because you're so in that space of like
i need to have this right now
and it's all here it's all you're not
experiencing
any aspect of what that pain is
that's making you you know step over the
threshold to the next drink or that
you're just you're completely ignoring
it you're not paying attention to it
you're not in it you're not feeling it
so her um
her mechanism was to
it really was pretty great
the way that she had me do it
i had to go to the um office supply
store and buy blue dots blue sticky dots
like you know like this big and i had to
place them around the house on on areas
of the house that triggered me as you
can imagine it might be the refrigerator
and the toilet and the bathroom door
stuff like that okay so when i was you
know mindlessly getting ready to go for
a binge because that's the space that
you're in when you're you know even when
i was you know snorting lines and
nightclubs all night long you know
you're just it's not like i am now going
to go have a line of cocaine like you're
just right you're not in it you're just
so
when i saw one of those blue dots which
was me heading to you know do something
destructive i had to stop
i had to take five seconds
and i had to locate
and and experience the part of my body
that was in pain and i mean in the
beginning i was like i'm not in pain my
body's not in pain what are you talking
about
it is it is it absolutely is so every
time i would stop she said you could do
it in five seconds all you have to do is
stop locate the inner pain where is it
what size is it what does it feel like
then if you still want to go
binge and purge
have at it well that that was like the
most brilliant therapy thing i'd ever
heard because in the beginning you just
need someone to say do this and then
then you can go do your thing because
it's relieving because you're so scared
to stop right so it was relieving
so out of curiosity why were you scared
to stop
oh my god because it was like my it was
it's your best friend and your worst
enemy just just like drugs or alcohol or
stuff it's it's you you're you're
absolutely madly in love with it and
then when you're sober so it's it's the
worst thing that's ever happened to you
but when you're in it and you're doing
it and you're about to do it oh god the
romance right like it's just it's
everything to you
so
um over time
i would be able to stop for
a minute two minutes three minutes five
minutes 20 minutes
and go through the full meditation that
she wanted me to go through and in the
beginning i was like yep five seconds
it's right there ow okay
binge and purge
over time once i was able to really
deepen that that practice and feel that
i would open my eyes and go
huh
i don't really need to binge right now i
think i can go outside and go for a walk
instead
and that took some months
but
wow it was this freedom and and
because i had been able to to connect
and go here it is here's the shape and
then of course you know without going
you know on and on on this show you know
we were going into the depths of why
that was in pain and where everything
about it right not just at shape and
shies but what it was literally the
nucleus of it was made of so um
yeah it was it at the end of the day a
lot of it felt like
um you know fear-based work right
because when you do any kind of
fear-based work you're looking in to
unravel and unpack
that pain that pain that fear that
anxiousness that hurt that you know that
trauma even though if mine wasn't an
event
there was a ton of trauma in there from
just practicing my eating disorder quite
frankly right that was built in so
yeah i don't know if that answers your
question but it was it was never
something like here's exactly how this
is going to work here's how i'm going to
lay out you know i knew she was a
meditation therapist like you said that
after her name and
um
so i i think really you know
yeah
now that i
i resonate with that a lot as somebody
who's looked at cognitive behavioral
therapy you know the difference between
talk therapy which i would expect you'd
be talking about the food and your
relationship to the food and how you
think about your parents and all that
stuff and then there's a sort of more
embodied
cognitive behavioral therapy tends to
focus on things like identifying what's
going on in your brain basically so
hey if you're
thinking that you're never going to be
good enough right that you recognize
that that type of thinking actually
isn't true you don't have any basis for
believing that's true
pattern interrupting so the dots you
know that hey you're so used to
mindlessly going to the bathroom to
vomit like boom the blue dot pulls you
out of that it interrupts that pattern
it creates more space so it's just
really interesting i find that when
something is true you get multiple
disciplines converging on it from
totally different directions
and so it sounds like
whether she intentionally is coming at
it from a cbt perspective or she just
recognized a truth to the things that
one needs to do to actually break these
patterns and that once you can get out
of that pattern get out of that death
loop now you can begin to form new
habits and and that brings us to the
bike so i know that she was saying like
hey as a part of your therapy you should
pick up
a new movement um you grab that bike
and uh let's pick that journey back up
so
at this point are you
realizing that
okay i get this obsessive focus can
actually be usable over here or
at what point does that become clear is
that a couple years in is that a couple
months in like when do you begin to see
that as potentially positive
yeah i love what you said about the the
cognitive therapy like i have to say
that was what attracted me to her me to
her most is that every therapist i had
before that was like
wanted to spend what felt like a year on
my childhood and they had their yellow
legal pad with their pen and it was just
you know oh
you know and it's like i am sick now
we can go back to my family if you want
to but we need i need step one through
three in an hour in our first session so
that when you leave i can get to work
because i i mean i had the real turning
point was a suicide attempt which it is
for many people and so i was there like
this isn't like we could talk about my
mom next year literally and she was like
you got it and we literally started
talking about my mom like a year later
to when i was actually probably even
more open and able to talk about you
know any any family stuff uh but that
was a big difference and i i just i just
had to say that because i feel like
so many people need to you know find
someone that's willing to go backwards
and dive in you know and and just and
because you're you're so desperate if
you're finally landing in the chair of
someone helping you right it's taking a
lot of bravery just to get there
and so find someone that's willing to go
backwards with you right start with what
you wouldn't think start with now go
back to childhood but um from the moment
i started
you know cycling when she said pick up a
bike and you know i i started
riding just up and down pch because it's
gorgeous and you could ride up to malibu
and back with back when there wasn't too
much traffic
and uh it was
just
i just fell in love like really insanely
really quickly you know and i think a
lot of it was just the freedom uh and
and just feeling like i could just be
which i couldn't before because i wasn't
connected
so you got to tell me about the word
releasing
releasing your eating disorder what do
you mean by that
i think it just i had i had beaten it
and now it was time to just kind of let
it go as in i don't own this it isn't me
well as in it's not my bff anymore like
this isn't going to be this isn't going
to be what i lean into when things get
tough this isn't going to be what i lean
into when
it things hurt or when i have a broken
heart
whatever all the crap that's coming next
in my life because it's we're all going
to have it this is no longer going to be
my go-to and i had i was well and i
wasn't leaning into it but i was it was
still very fresh and i hadn't had enough
challenges to prove to me that that
wouldn't be my go-to right when stress
and strain and hardship and and and you
know work just life anxiety came on so i
had i just remember having a lot of bike
rides going it's just you know it was it
was kind of like the you know the the
goodbye letter you write to the former
lover
so um i
i decided you know what if i'm gonna if
i'm gonna ride this many hours and miles
i want to do something good with it so i
signed up to do the california aids ride
which went from san francisco to los
angeles and it's like they don't go a
direct route so it was like 700 miles in
seven days and
that's where i just was like i don't
know how i am going to
make a living doing aids rides
uh but this is what i want to do
and it was like obviously that's not
going to be it but the guys that i rode
with on the aids ride were you know
pretty accomplished and they'd been
riding for a long time and i was uh you
know suffering a lot but staying with
them and at the at the end of the aids
ride in los angeles they turned and said
you know what you need to
maybe try a race or something because
this is a little abnormal that you're on
a mountain bike and we're on road bikes
you know you're on a mountain bike with
shocks and you're keeping up with so you
know maybe you should take you should
just sort of just at least dive in and
see if there's something here
is there ever a point where um you start
putting a strategy together or is this
just sort of one foot in front of the
other having fun sort of chasing that
high
uh
oh [__] i was chasing a high one i
probably was um
no strategy whatsoever i mean i just
didn't know enough to put a strategy
together like i literally sat down with
one of the guys from the aids right and
i said well i don't know how to do a
race he's like well i think you need a
license and i was like who gives out
licenses and he's like i don't know
maybe usa cycling that's a good idea go
to the internet i mean it was like you
know just i was just true
green so
i did a couple of my first races and
quickly realized that
the main thing i was behind the eight
ball in was uh what we call in cycling
you know miles in your legs i didn't
have enough miles in my legs i was also
uh not technically uh good enough which
i never became really technically good
enough in my opinion because i started
at 26.
about the time we went to silver medal i
think uh we we've gotten about as
technically proficient as we need to
nope i am i'm absolutely 100 positive
i'm the only cycling olympian in history
that can only clip out with one
that that is out
i would fall over it's like really yeah
no i never got really that great at the
technicality a lot of people were scared
to ride next to me for i think probably
many years
uh
but anyway i decided i need to get like
you know some some miles on my legs and
i had a pretty i by that point i was
working again and i was working in um
commercials and music video doing like
art department production so you know
set design
and i was making really solid money i
lived in venice on the beach and i
thought if i get a job downtown bike
message dream
it's 26 miles downtown obviously 26
miles home all the guys because it was
only guys that are bike messengers down
there uh they'll help me with my skills
i'm going to probably do 10 miles just
down there so we're we're upwards of 60
65 miles a day if i go get a job it was
4.19 an hour
um and so that's what i did i quit the
production job which was like you know
87 times that per hour and
got this bike messenger job and
you know over a year it got quite a bit
of miles in my legs and i don't know if
that was the best way to go about it but
um it was just the only way that i knew
how to
do it and make a little bit of a tiny
bit of a living you know while trying to
get the miles in my leg so that's what i
did
all right so trying to put these pieces
together um for people to grab onto and
say okay i'm going to be strategic i'm
going to learn these lessons i'm really
curious to know
to take that job obviously that is
clearly the beginning of a strategy even
if nothing came before that to leave
this high-paying job and to say okay
bike messenger hours on my legs i got to
do this i'm going to go down there i'm
going to take this huge financial hip
and i'm going to pursue something that i
love
how does that begin to escalate do you
are you pushing yourself yet are you
saying like i'm going to try to get to
work faster than the day before i'm
going to deliver these packages faster
than anybody else because when i think
about anybody pursuing real greatness
and you talked about this deep dark
place you have to go through to suffer
to get the results um
how does that is there some joy
beginning to build and getting better
and improving
well
i was basically just getting beaten to
crap every day
i mean why keep doing it strategy
well
exactly i mean there's there's that side
that there's that suffering side that
just you know kept showing up that like
oh you know i could i could suffer more
than the next person so and that was a
pleasurable part of yourself narrative
where you're like i value in myself my
ability to suffer more than the next
person
um i just knew that i loved cycling and
it was going to take
suffering i had learned that much and so
i was going to have to get good at
suffering
out of curiosity why do you love
something
that forces you to endure so much
suffering
well there's obviously many many more
aspects of it than the suffering part
you know that's just an aspect of it i
was
madly in love with learning something
completely new
i i you know i had never been good at
any of it it was kind of cool finding
out that there might be just this like
little bit of a hidden talent in
something that i had absolutely no idea
existed
uh like i said i loved it just i loved
the freedom of just riding the bike i
mean that just felt so good and then i
started doing group rides
um
which is just you know a bunch of dudes
because again it was mostly dudes uh you
know just kind of getting together on a
weekend morning and it's basically a
race and i started doing those and i was
getting you know dropped from the first
let's say
10 miles and then the next week i would
go and i'd get dropped at my 11 and
these are like 80 mile rides so bad one
time that we were in simi valley i
didn't know where i was and i had to
take a cab back to where my car was
because i was so lost and dropped and
there was no cell phones and you know so
um but i think that it that just it it's
like the curiosity of that kept me in
there like could i next time maybe stay
in 15 miles and by that point i had
gotten a coach who was very encouraging
and you know there's definitely people
along the route that kept me believing
if it was just up to me i don't know if
i would have believed all the way to the
olympics you know necessarily but it was
like there was just enough every time
but it was never like i never sat back
i'm gonna write the like 10-year 15-year
strategy plan to make it to the olympic
games like there is definitely
definitely none of that it was just i
always feel like it was just
okay
here's the road and
choose
choose the the harder the harder turn
this is a little bit easier if you keep
going this way choose kind of the the
challenging one the little bit harder
one
tell me more about that why why do that
because i think it made me better you
know going on these group rides were
like i had no business on them at all in
the beginning and so every time i would
do it it would it was it was it was hard
every time and i knew if i pushed myself
just a little bit more or i went just a
little bit harder i would get just a
little bit better so it taught me that
if i if i take the hard road uh
instead of the easy road forward then
i'm gonna i'm gonna learn more i'm gonna
be better trained i'm gonna be better
set up for
maybe eventual success but at that point
i was just thinking about success
meaning like finishing the group ride
not success like going to the olympics
just like that is what is going to be
able to
you know get me there i guess faster
and do you enjoy competition is that a
part of your identity or your makeup
i'm very competitive with myself i've
never been extremely competitive with
others and that was
uh that was kind of a problem like it
was a little bit i mean i don't know
it's a maybe a blessing and a curse you
know because i had some teammates that
were highly competitive with other
people and the the problem with that is
is you don't have any control over the
other people
so that can be a you know a spiral
downwards as well but uh
yeah so very very competitive
with myself and seeing what's next but i
i never felt extremely competitive with
others and a lot of my teammates that
were very competitive with others they
would have to develop like this hatred
of the competitor and that never
resonated with me
you said that it was maybe a problem
though why would being competitive just
with yourself be a problem
well
it it towards the towards the end of my
road racing career i had about a 10-year
road racing career and then i switched
over to the track more out of uh
interest and excitement and and because
i was scared of it is is really why i
wanted to try it um
i
i was just i wasn't
i had gone so far beyond what i ever
thought that i could do
that i became um kind of complacent and
satisfied because i wasn't competitive
with anyone else so it was just that was
the end of the road for me and with road
which i guess would have been fine
because i was
you know
very pleased with the races that i had
won and what i had been able to do in
europe and you know it felt very
fulfilling and um but because i wasn't
competitive with other people all that
much
you know i was probably going to end a
career too soon
very interesting okay now i want to talk
about that deep dark place that one has
to go through
um to suffer well and get the results
what what does it mean to go to a deep
dark place
uh it's hard to put words on i think
it's very hard to
like just use
language to describe
what it is like or what it feels like
um if that's what you're asking like
what it what it feels like it is
experiencing yeah like so
i i'm a huge believer in the darkness
i'm a huge believer in one
learning to harness the ability to
demand more from yourself than anyone
else thinks is possible and david
goggins has a great quote he says when
you think that you're broken and you
couldn't possibly go another step you're
only 40 of the way there
and i thought that is so true and so
powerful
and but what does it take to convince
yourself when you when when a part of
your mind is screaming at you this is it
there is no more and you find something
a reason you find an anger you find an
animalistic impulse you find something
and you grab a hold of it and you
leverage it i know what i do but i'm
super curious to know
what that moment was like like i know
you had i think it was called the anger
stick or something that your therapist
had you smashing the force you obviously
had learned how to take anger from a
very diffuse place and channel it into
something very specific and very
concrete and i don't know if it was
something like that for you or you know
what what were you harnessing
i think at the you know i think at the
base of it
one of the one of the biggest issues
with our society and and the lack of
productivity
with some is an extreme
fear of being uncomfortable
no one wants to be uncomfortable every
every every single company out there
that's marketing anything to us right
from pharmaceuticals to food to whatever
it is it's about us being comfortable
right and just feeling pretty good or
sort of good or kind of good
it's never about being uncomfortable and
so i knew that
being uncomfortable was gonna be the
it's always the key to change not just
in cycling i mean it every single time
it's it is the key that unlocks change
is being uncomfortable um so i knew that
if i could push just a little bit more i
would get a little bit better and some
days i was able to go into
you know a dark-ish cave and some days i
was able to go into pitch blackness it
depended on the day but i knew that
there was no way to
getting better unless i got
pretty damn uncomfortable almost every
single time so i just knew that to be
the case and like i said before i think
the ability to push really hard past
the initial uh you're in pain you're in
pain what are you doing stop right now
you know like your body says for
survival mode
was just the reality that i knew that
it was going to get make me better and
it was going to be over soon that was
really part of it because it was not
ever over for a very long time in my
eating disorder it was like what is this
going to be you know i mean it's 30
seconds we're doing minute intervals you
know we're doing 10 minute intervals or
we're doing five you know five minute
intervals like that's nothing that's not
really a real amount of time and so that
was
just i think just that history that i'd
had that i knew this is this is going to
be over and then what might i get from
it i was just way too curious of a
person to see
what might materialize if i was if i was
able to go so you know curiosity some
but i think
and what did materialize for you what
what has awaited you on the other side
of that grand pursuit
well almost every single time is is
improvement
you know it was just i was better it
would be it would be five more watts
that i could hold at threshold or you
know
a little incremental right but it was
you know 50 more pounds uh times you
know five sets times 60 reps on the legs
on the inverted leg sled i i started out
at about 300 pounds in before olympics
it was 600 pounds i was pushing times 60
reps times five cents you know but that
wasn't like i didn't go from 300 to 600
pounds overnight you know it was just it
was just little bits every time and and
then it's so motivating right when you
get those little incremental bits of
movement forward uh that starts to show
you you know there's there's a real root
to
what now has become a dream
um
that it's addictive
and i have a little addictive side of me
so
that probably was part of it too
talk to me about the was it called the
anger stick
yeah yes the anger stick was was you
know it sort of she had me work with
that at the almost the very beginning
beginning of our of our time together
and it's just like a you know like a
bath towel rolled up super tight with
tons of rubber bands on it i still have
it downstairs
um in our storage and it was one of the
ways that she helped me connect me to me
right connecting that mind body again so
that experience of of course in any
therapy journey
you know you're going to hit anger spots
where you're just so frustrated with
something or you're so mad at something
you're just you know you can't get over
this one thing
or
be and so she would literally have me
take this anger stick i would get down
on all fours and i would literally take
it and whip it back and down on the
ground like i was beating the ground
which is what i was doing i know my
downstairs neighbors were like this is
awesome you and therapy but
it was an extraordinary release of so
many emotions that would come out
mostly i did it by myself but i got
to where i could do it in front of her
which was a little bit of a process
because you feel like a complete idiot
when you're doing it um and then i would
be able to stop you know always brought
hysterical crying i mean i just could
never do the anger stick without ending
up in just a you know a bucket of tears
um but when i was able to finally do it
in front of her then we could we could
cess through all of that sat you know
what was coming up that was sadness and
fear and and everything it was it was it
was really helpful when i started to be
able to do in front of her um but i
didn't do the anger stick you know
cycling was enough
you know the anger stick was was our
first year of therapy i would say we
used it quite often
i asked because i once heard you say
that um you know going through therapy
the anger stick was a big thing for me
because i needed somewhere to aim my
anger or needed something to aim my
anger at and i thought oh that's really
interesting and one of the things one of
the reasons i'm so drawn to olympic
athletes or any athlete that
competes at that high level is
you're you're learning to leverage
something so you've learned to leverage
your addictive personality your ability
to be obsessive your
ability and willingness to suffer the
way that you value yourself for doing
hard things that you know like you said
instead of taking the easy path you're
you're always just doing that harder
thing that harder thing and
what i find so
beautiful about your story is your your
life was bifurcated for a brief moment
and i'm sure it felt forever at the time
but you know five or six years in the
grand scheme of how much you've now
ended up accomplishing it you know it
was this blip of
this all these powerful elements of
coalesce but they're aimed at something
that doesn't make sense and it's
destructive and self-coercive uh
corrosive excuse me and you're you're
telling yourself a self-narrative that
is self-defeating and there's no joy and
obviously i think you attempted suicide
multiple times if i'm not mistaken and
and so to go from all of that to finding
a way to aim it
all the same things it's still you right
you were the same person that was going
through the hard times is going through
the amazing stuff but you're you've
learned to aim it at something
incredible so much you talk
about how you're beyond it and i don't
know if you've ever used the word cured
but you know that you're not struggling
with it on a day-to-day basis and that
to me is so incredible that
you were able to find this outlet you
know whether it was the anger stick or
racing or now i know you're going super
hard on activism you know it's you're
finding things to aim these very intense
um traits that you have but now at
things that are giving you these
extraordinary outcomes and you know i
think about why do the show and like
what all of this stuff is it it's about
helping people
do that you know to find a way to take
something and and find a new outlet for
it um like i tell people don't try to
get rid of the negative voice in your
head try to leverage it use it for
something um and your story is one of
such extraordinary shift of output um
and your willingness to suffer goes from
trying to make yourself disappear to
being able to
do the inverse sled with 600 pounds for
how many reps
60. i mean that's crazy so
the the amount of like
lactic suffering that one would go
through
doing that is
insane so yeah it is it is absolutely
breathtaking what you've been able to
aim all of this stuff at
um
yeah that is that is a truly
extraordinary story
well i mean you know when you when when
you're in it
it it certainly doesn't feel like
anything that you're describing right
now in terms of its extraordinaryness
you know it's just
you just it's just
you just first just your story you know
just those were just the decisions that
i made and or lack of decisions that i
made and just uh
kind of just happened it just it when i
look back on it it really just feels
like
there was just a whole lot of times
when i couldn't when i could have given
up and i didn't
when i really look back and and really
sit there with with the pivotal moments
it it wasn't anything
heroic it was just like
i just decided not to give up it was
just the opposite of is you know just i
just chose the opposite of giving up
um
that was it
it really and but just a lot of times
put together you know not just once but
i don't know probably three or four
hundred times i hadn't made that choice
you know just i'm gonna i'm gonna keep
going i really wanna see what's around
the next corner
um
and that's it so i think so many people
you know just
instilling themselves with
some of it just because just comes
natural but i think you
we need can
be more curious
and as i mentioned that before that was
a big driver was my curiosity of what
was around the corner like if i just
suffered a little bit more i just did
something a little bit different than
the next person or i just
worked a little bit harder so you know
envelope yourself in in in curiosity of
what might be if you sort of take that
path that maybe not everybody else would
take
i love that
that is the perfect place to end where
can people find you
thanks for having me
where can they find me um
i'm terrible at social media but i try
because like you said i'm an activist
now uh animal rights activist so um on
instagram i am at vegan olympian
and uh i run a non-profit now in that
same space and the non-profit is switch
for good so switch the number for
good.org and then we are switch for good
on all the social media channels too so
amazing well guys check her out it's
extraordinary her journey as you just
heard is absolutely mind-blowing and
speaking of mind-blowing if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe here and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
and that next step is the first step to
evolving
changing growing and learning and
becoming
literally the best version of yourself
that's the most beautiful thing
it's not going to kill you
and putting yourself in the game you're
giving yourself an opportunity to
achieve something that everybody else
said was impossible